# Design of Pinger

Pinger was implemented as a Flask web app that was ultimately a potpourri of Python, HTML, CSS, JavaScript, SQL, and Jinja.

# ```app.py```
The principal tasks handled in ```app.py``` were back-end, server-side functions that allow the user to add and remove URLs from the table of websites they wish to track and monitor for updates. Courtesy of ```SQL``` from the ```cs50``` library, we were able to give the user a great deal of freedom to add and remove websites from the "Websites to Monitor" table even after closing the tab (i.e. when they no longer wish to track any websites and are done with using the app for now), as by writing ```db=SQL("sqlite:///websites_monitored.db")``` and then executing the appropriate SQL commands to update or delete table entries containing information on the site name, inputted URL (provided it is valid, as checked by ```validators.url``` from the validators library), and the time since it was last updated. The way that we designed ```app.py``` to detect changes in the content of an inputted webpage was through using the SHA256 hash function. First, we obtain an initial hash of the HTML code at the given URL, and then compare it to a hash of the same website 30 seconds later. If the hashes are different, the website changed! We store these hashes in our SQL table as well. Admittedly, there's a chance that a webpage may be changed while the hash stays the same, but the probability of this happening is very low thanks to the SHA-256 algorithm; on the other hand, by storing hashes rather than the entirety of content in a webpage, we save lots of space in our SQL table. ([Credit for this approach goes to the authors of this article.](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-script-to-monitor-website-changes/)) ``` app.py``` in turn returns a render template of the website with the table as well as a list containing updated websites, which it then passes to ```index.html```’s script code for the purposes of notifying the user via a browser notification.

# ```index.html```
This is the layout of the homepage. In the header, we use the ```http-equiv``` attribute of the meta tag to ensure that the website refreshes every 30 seconds, which allows us to check whether each tracked website has been updated every 30 seconds. We also use JavaScript notifications to provide browser-level notifications for websites that are updated. We also import Bootstrap in the header. In the HTML body, we create a title for the website and we add an image icon for the website. Below that, using jinja, we show all websites that we are tracking in a table by looping through a list of such websites from our SQLite database. Finally, below that, we use a form to allow users to input the information for any new websites that they want to track.

# ```styles.css```
This file, beyond just being that which factors out style, enhances the front-end appearance of Pinger, employs aesthetics that offer the user a pleasant experience using the web app, and exists to allow for even greater future scaling of the visual theme of Pinger. The Bootstrap buttons present on the page (in particular, the Submit button for adding a website to track and Remove buttons for removing a website from the tracking table) respond to mouse hovering by changing color. In a similar vein, the container/division of HTML elements relevant to website URL submission for tracking also responds to mouse hovering (easing and subduing the background in a way that responds to user movement). Lastly, the white navigation bar present at the top of the page uses Bootstrap’s signature navbar brand red color to display “Pinger | Ultimate Website Monitor” in cool fashion, ultimately serving as a standout contrast to the bluer colors of the website.



